- Start Date: 2015-04-23
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Spree Issue: (leave this empty)

# Abstract

Single Paragraph abstract of the feature covering motivation, detailed design, drawbacks, and alternatives.

# Motivation

Spree is an ecommerce framework that, like Rails, abstracts large amounts of its functionality into multiple gems.
This allows for a clear seperation of concerns and easier way to manage dependencies.
The technique Spree and Rails uses are to help modularize large amounts of functionality to remove monolithic application structure, yet not be a messy ball of spagetti microservices.
Welcome to macroservices.

The topic of this paper is on the Spree API (`spree_api`) "macroservice".
The Spree API depends on the Spree Core (`spree_core`) gem which is where it receives the majority of its business logic, helpers, and mailers.
While the Spree API is able to provide API endpoints to Spree Core, it falls short on performance, JSON API design, and client-side MVC support (read: EmberJS).

The motivation of RFC 001 is to build a second version of the Spree API with performance, JSON API best practice, and client-side support as the key motivators.

# Detailed Design

The current API of Spree is mature and covers a large amount of functionality.
The API uses [Rabl](https://github.com/nesquena/rabl) to render the API views, it does not follow the [JSON API](http://jsonapi.org), and is not client side optimized.
The "V1 API" was built before the time of React and Ember and the JSON API.

## JSON Serialization

Before looking at the JSON API and client-side optimization, we should first identify _how_ the API could be built and serialized.
Rabl serializes JSON by using a ruby DSL with the files stored in the views folder.
Some of the problems with serializing JSON from the views are:

- Expensive to locate the views in the file system.
- JSON serialization is done through a request/response life cycle.
- Rabl does not actively support Rails Engines (where a Rails application may have multiple view paths).

There are four popular ways to implement JSON serialization in Rails:

1. [`#to_json`](http://apidock.com/rails/ActiveRecord/Serialization/to_json): The fastest and simplest form of JSON serialization in ruby.
2. [JBuilder](https://github.com/rails/jbuilder): The default rails JSON serializer where maturity is its main pro.
3. [Rabl](https://github.com/nesquena/rabl): The current serializer that is framework agnostic.
4. [Active Model Serializers (AMS)](https://github.com/rails-api/active_model_serializers): A ruby JSON serializer via ruby classes instead of views.

The `#to_json` methodology is the most optimal implementation, but it falls short when serializing JSON data from a database.
Quite often, you can implement a SQL call to a DB and then have the returned response as json instead of serializing it through ruby.

JBuilder, Rabl, and AMS are all equal candidates for the new JSON serializer, but due to Spree's size, the best tool for the job would the fastest tool.

A large amount of JBuilder and Rabl's performance issues are with the views.
AMS succeeds because it is core ruby code instead of having a dependency on the views.
Ontop of AMS's performance improvements, if the the attributes AMS is fetching are purely columnar, then the results could be fetched by a SQL call.
This means that users of PostgreSQL or MySQL might benefit from a gem.
For PostgreSQL there is [Postgres Ext Serializers](https://github.com/dockyard/postgres_ext-serializers).
An example SQL call, using the AMS API, is:

```sql
(WITH spree_products_attributes_filter AS (
  SELECT "spree_products"."id", "spree_products"."name", "spree_products"."slug", "spree_products"."description"
  FROM "spree_products" WHERE "spree_products"."deleted_at" IS NULL
), spree_products_as_json_array AS (
  SELECT COALESCE(json_agg(tbl), '[]')
  AS products, 1 
  AS match
  FROM (
    SELECT *
    FROM "spree_products_attributes_filter"
  )
  AS tbl
), jsons AS (
  SELECT "spree_products_as_json_array"."products"
  FROM "spree_products_as_json_array"
)
SELECT row_to_json(jsons)
FROM "jsons");
```

It is for this reason that the Spree V2 API should only include the column names.
If a person requires data such as full name, this can be easily done in Ember Data via the `Ember.computed()` function:

```javascript
// app/models/product.js
import Ember from 'ember';
import DS from 'ember-data';

export default DS.Model.extend({
  name: DS.attr('string'),
  description: DS.attr('string'),
  slug: DS.attr('string'),
  variants: DS.hasMany('variant'),
  master: Ember.computed('variants', function() {
    return this.get('variants').findBy('isMaster', true);
  }),
  price: Ember.computed('master', function() {
    return this.get('master').get('price').get('amount');
  }),
  displayPrice: Ember.computed('master', function() {
    return this.get('master').get('displayPrice');
  })
});

// app/models/variant.js
import Ember from 'ember';
import DS from 'ember-data';

export default DS.Model.extend({
  isMaster: DS.attr('boolean'),
  product: DS.belongsTo('product'),
  price: DS.belongsTo('price'),
  displayPrice: Ember.computed('price', function() {
    return `$${this.get('price').get('amount').toFixed(2)}`;
  })
});

// app/models/price.js
import DS from 'ember-data';

export default DS.Model.extend({
  amount: DS.attr('number'),
  currency: DS.attr('string'),
  variant: DS.belongsTo('variant')
});
```

What if the user's project is not using Ember?
Given Spree's large (but not monolithic) data, the developer should be expected to have a mature methodology for local data storage.
For [Angular](https://github.com/angular/angular.js) this would be [AngularData](https://github.com/js-data/js-data-angular).
For [React](https://github.com/facebook/react) this would be [Immutable](https://github.com/facebook/immutable-js).
For [Backbone](https://github.com/jashkenas/backbone) this would be... SoL for a standard data collection library.

Since manipulating data is expected at this level, then serializing data from business logic should either be kept to a minimum or not performed within ruby.
This means that the JSON serialization within Spree would have two benefits:

1. The JSON serialization can be performed at the DB level for some lucky individuals.
2. The JSON serialization will be far more performant since ruby doesn't have to serialize as much data.

## AMS API with Spree and Extensibility

If AMS is used for the second version of the Spree API, then a major conern should be the extensibility of the API.
With the current API, for a developer to add or remove functionality to a Rabl template, then they would have to completely overwrite that template.
There are three cases that need to be looked at for ensuring Spree is extensible and developer friendly with AMS:

1. Adding an attribute.
2. Editing an attribute.
3. Removing an attribute.

Given this serializer:

```ruby
# app/serializers/spree/product_serializer.rb
module Spree
  class ProductSerializer < Spree::BaseSerializer
    attributes :id, :name, :description, :slug
  end
end
```

Imagine you added an association so that a product would `belong_to :store`.
How would you go about adding that attribute?
In AMS this would be done as so:

```ruby
# app/serializers/spree/product_serializer_decorator.rb
Spree::ProductSerializer.class_eval do
  attributes :store_id
end
```

What if the developer wanted to have the name capitalized?

```ruby
# app/serializers/spree/product_serializer_decorator.rb
Spree::ProductSerializer.class_eval do
  def name
    super.capitalize
  end
end
```

What if a developer is not using an attribute for their project and wants to improve performance.
They may not be using the slug attribute and would like to remove this.
There is no clear, intuitive way to perform this with the current implementation.

A more developer-friendly implementation would be:

```ruby
# app/serializers/spree/product_serializer.rb
module Spree
  class ProductSerializer < Spree::BaseSerializer
    # Parenthesis added to avoid confusion from splat vs. multiplication.
    attributes(*attribute_keys)

    def self.attribute_keys
      [:id, :name, :description, :slug]
    end
  end
end
```

This way, if a developer would like to remove an attribute, they may do as so:

```ruby
# app/serializers/spree/product_serializer_decorator.rb
Spree::ProductSerializer.class_eval do
  def self.attribute_keys
    [:id, :name, :description]
  end
end
```

As you can see in the above example, this not very optimal.
To allow for a more robust solution (and the usage of `super`) a more optimal solution would be:

```ruby
# app/serializers/spree/base_serializer.rb
module Spree
  class BaseSerializer < ActiveModel::Serializer
    attributes(*attribute_keys)

    def self.attribute_keys
      name.sub('Serializer', '').constantize.column_names
    end
  end
end

# app/serializers/spree/product_serializer.rb
module Spree
  class ProductSerializer < Spree::BaseSerializer
  end
end

# app/serializers/spree/product_serializer_decorator.rb
Spree::ProductSerializer.class_eval do
  self.attribute_keys
    super - %w(slug)
  end
end
```

For associations, there is no need to add a `has_many` or `has_one` to the AMS serializer since the IDs are already stored as a column name.
If a developer would like to add an association, that may be done via their own code and not from Spree.

## JSON API

The [JSON API](http://jsonapi.org) details best practices when constructing an API.
For the second version of Sprees' API, the JSON API will allow developers to expect a consistent and standardized JSON API.
The JSON API strcutures responses by using train case, specifying that the response is in the new `application/vmd.api+json` media type, and follows a very specific data structure.

### Responding with a JSON API format

If Spree decides to respond data under the JSON API format, than an "adapter" would be needed.
For Ember Data, this would be the [Ember JSON API](https://github.com/kurko/ember-json-api).
for Backbone, this would be the [Backbone JSON API](https://github.com/guillaumervls/backbone-jsonapi).
Angular and React may need community support, but they are frameworks lenient enough to not apply any restrictions on the response.

# Drawbacks

The drawbacks for implementing a new API in Spree are worrisome.
The main one, at this moment, is the amount of work needed to do so, but this will be the driving feature of Spree 4.

Another drawback is the usage of the JSON API.
It appears to have a large community backing, but it feels like a "vapor standard".
If Spree uses the JSON API, Spree will become one of the first large backers to the JSON API project.
While the JSON API is small, it is also the __JSON__ API and _not_ the __XML__ API.
This may mean that formatting responses as XML (which will be required for third parties connecting to a Spree API) may be challenging.

# Alternatives

Before covering the alternatives, a review of the two main reasons why the API needs to be rebuild should be recovered:

1. The API is non-standard.
2. Rabl adds a glass roof.

If the API is non-standard, why not simply use Rabl to restructure the API for the JSON API?
This is a good point.
If Spree wants to target an API where _response_ is the main priority, then there is no reason to switch dependencies or spend time considering others.
Just rewrite the API and be done with it.

If Rabl adds a glass roof for development, why not change dependencies and stick to the current API?
This is also a good point.
If Spree considers the dependency to be the only bottle-neck, then the current specs can be kept and the responses may be rebuild to match the previous API.
This would allow a developer's workflow to improve and less time would be spent on development.

# Unresolved Questions

A portion of the API design that has not been considered is the formatting and usage of XML.
It is obvious that Spree must support XML, but if the JSON API format is accepted, then how will users feel if the XML is structured as if the XML was following the JSON API?
Should there be an alternative methodology for formatting XML?

If AMS is accepted, which version is to be used?
Caching is a main priority, therefore 0.9 will not be used.
It was previously decided that 0.8 would be used, but the first release candidate AMS 0.10 has been released.
The code examples above are written with AMS's 0.8 API.
Is it in Spree's best interest to use the latest version of AMS or the conventional 0.8?